---
layout: simple
title: Adam Hawkins - Application Performance Consultations
---

# Performance Consultations

Have you read my articles and have questions about them? Do you need
help implementing the techniques described in them? Do you know what
you're doing, but are having problems getting your application
performing the way you want? Then I can help you.

I've helped many people so far. I've worked on traditional Rails
applications and modern client side apps using Ember.js. I've helped
people all across the spectrum make their apps faster and pass on
knowledge. I've never had an unsatisified customer.

## For People With Questions

I provide one hour of my time and you can ask me anything you like. I
can review your application code, answer your questions, code review,
or anything else you can think of. I will follow up with you after the
fact to ensure the strategies we discussed are implemented and
perfoming correctly. This service is **$200**. [Email
me](mailto:adam@hawkins.io&subject=Caching+Consultation) if this
describes you.

## For People Who Don't Know

You may be in a situation where you simply have a slow application.
You know that it should be faster, but do not know how to get there.
This is where I come in. I can review your code and diagonse problems
that we can discuss a plan and answer your questions in a
consultation. This service is **$400**. [Email
me](mailto:adam@hawkins.io&subject=Caching+Consultation) if this
describes you.

## For People Who Need Everything

I can also implement any strategies described in our consultations or
on my blog. Fast applications matter. They play huge roll in user
experience. Users love fast application. I can work 1 one 1 or with a
team implementing a custom performance strategy for your application.
This means you and I will work together so I can full understand your
application and what is important. This service **starts at $2000**. [Email
me](mailto:adam@hawkins.io&subject=Caching+Consultation) and let's
talk if this describes you.

The general consultations and code review services happen over Skype
or Google Hangouts. I recommend a Google Hangout because it can be
recorded and shared with your coworkers. I'm currently living in
Europe. Consultations are usually scheduled for one or two days after
initial contact.

If you are interested please [email
me](mailto:adam@hawkins.io&subject=Caching+Consultation). I look
forward to working with you.
